= RailRoad 

RailRoad generates models and controllers diagrams in DOT language for a 
Rails application.

This is a patched version based on the original v0.5.0.

I (Peter Hoeg) am not trying to hijack Javier's project, but since he hasn't released any
new versions since May '08, I figured I'd better put one out in order to make
railroad work with rails v2.3.

= Usage

Run RailRoad on the Rails application's root directory. You can redirect its
output to a .dot file or pipe it to the dot or neato utilities to produce a
graphic. Model diagrams are intended to be processed using dot and
controller diagrams are best processed using neato.

    railroad [options] command
 
= To use for your Rails app

This will give you access to rake tasks creating diagrams.

- Add to Gemfile or to environment.rb
- put into [RAILS_ROOT]/lib/tasks railroad.rb file:

    $VERBOSE = nil
    Dir["#{Gem.searcher.init_gemspecs.find { |gs| gs.name == 'railroad' }.full_gem_path}/lib/tasks/*.rake"].each { |ext| load ext }

- in Rakefile add:
    require 'tasks/railroad'

== Options

Common options:
    -b, --brief                      Generate compact diagram
                                       (no attributes nor methods)
    -e, --exclude file1[,fileN]      Exclude given files
    -i, --inheritance                Include inheritance relations
    -l, --label                      Add a label with diagram information
                                       (type, date, migration, version)
    -o, --output FILE                Write diagram to file FILE
    -v, --verbose                    Enable verbose output
                                       (produce messages to STDOUT)

Models diagram options:
    -a, --all                        Include all models
                                       (not only ActiveRecord::Base derived)
        --hide-magic                 Hide magic field names
        --hide-types                 Hide attributes type
    -j, --join                       Concentrate edges
    -m, --modules                    Include modules
    -p, --plugins-models             Include plugins models
    -t, --transitive                 Include transitive associations
                                     (through inheritance)

Controllers diagram options:
        --hide-public                Hide public methods
        --hide-protected             Hide protected methods
        --hide-private               Hide private methods

Other options:
    -h, --help                       Show this message
        --version                    Show version and copyright

== Commands

    -M, --models                     Generate models diagram
    -C, --controllers                Generate controllers diagram
    -A, --aasm                       Generate "acts as state machine" diagram


== Examples

    railroad -o models.dot -M 
      Produces a models diagram to the file 'models.dot'
    railroad -a -i -o full_models.dot -M 
      Models diagram with all classes showing inheritance relations
    railroad -M | dot -Tsvg > models.svg
      Model diagram in SVG format
    railroad -C | neato -Tpng > controllers.png
      Controller diagram in PNG format
    railroad -h
      Shows usage help


= Processing DOT files

To produce a PNG image from model diagram generated by RailRoad you can
issue the following command:

    dot -Tpng models.dot > models.png

If you want to do the same with a controller diagram, use neato instead of
dot:

    neato -Tpng controllers.dot > controllers.png

If you want to produce SVG (vectorial, scalable, editable) files, you can do
the following:

    dot -Tsvg models.dot > models.svg
    neato -Tsvg controllers.dot > controllers.svg

Important: There is a bug in Graphviz tools when generating SVG files that
cause a text overflow. You can solve this problem editing (with a text
editor, not a graphical SVG editor) the file and replacing around line 12
"font-size:14.00;" by "font-size:11.00;", or by issuing the following command 
(see "man sed"):

    sed -i 's/font-size:14.00/font-size:11.00/g' file.svg

Note: For viewing and editing SVG there is an excellent opensource tool
called Inkscape (similar to Adobe Illustrator. For DOT processing you can
also use Omnigraffle (on Mac OS X).

= RailRoad as a rake task

The following task is based on Thomas Ritz code, http://www.galaxy-ritz.de, and then slightly modified.

In your Rails application, put the following rake tasks into 'lib/task/diagrams.rake':

  namespace :doc do

    namespace :diagram do

      format = 'svg'
      common_options = '-i -l'
      old_font = 'font-size:14.00'
      new_font = 'font-size:11.00'

      desc "Generate model diagrams"
      task :models do
        sh "railroad #{common_options} -a -m -M | dot -T#{format} | sed 's/#{old_font}/#{new_font}/g' > doc/models.#{format}"
      end

      desc "Generate controller diagrams"
      task :controllers do
        sh "railroad #{common_options} -C | neato -T#{format} | sed 's/#{old_font}/#{new_font}/g' > doc/controllers.#{format}"
      end
    end

    desc "Create diagrams of models and controllers"
    task :diagrams => %w(diagram:models diagram:controllers)

  end

Then, 'rake doc:diagrams' produces 'doc/models.svg' and 'doc/controllers.svg'.

= Requirements

RailRoad has been tested with the following Ruby and Rails versions

== Ruby
* 1.8.5
* 1.8.7

== Rails
* 1.1.6 to 1.2.3
* 2.3.2

There are no additional requirements (nevertheless, all your Rails application
requirements must be installed).

In order to view/export the DOT diagrams, you'll need the processing tools
from Graphviz.

= Website and Project Home

http://railroad.rubyforge.org

= License

RailRoad is distributed  under the terms of the GNU General Public License
as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the 
License, or (at your option) any later version.

See LICENSE for details.

== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2007-2008 Javier Smaldone
Copyright (c) 2009 Peter Hoeg

See LICENSE for details.

== Authors

See AUTHORS for details.
